Fundamental analysis - Wikipedia
Jump to content
Main menu
Main menu
move to sidebar
hide
Navigation
Main pageContentsCurrent eventsRandom articleAbout WikipediaContact usDonate
Contribute
HelpLearn to editCommunity portalRecent changesUpload file
Search
Search
Create account
Log in
Personal tools
Create account Log in
Pages for logged out editors learn more
ContributionsTalk
Contents
move to sidebar
hide
(Top)
1The two analytical models
2Use by different portfolio styles
3Top-down and bottom-up approaches
4Procedures
5Criticisms
6See also
7References
8External links
Toggle the table of contents
Fundamental analysis
40 languages
العربيةAzərbaycancaবাংলাBân-lâm-gúCatalàCebuanoČeštinaDanskDeutschΕλληνικάEspañolEuskaraفارسیGaeilge한국어हिन्दीHrvatskiBahasa IndonesiaItalianoעבריתLietuviųBahasa MelayuNederlandsनेपाली日本語Norsk bokmålPolskiPortuguêsRomânăРусскийSimple EnglishSlovenčinaSuomiSvenskaதமிழ்ไทยУкраїнськаTiếng Việt粵語中文
Edit links
ArticleTalk
English
ReadEditView history
Tools
Tools
move to sidebar
hide
Actions
ReadEditView history
General
What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationCite this pageGet shortened URLDownload QR codeWikidata item
Print/export
Download as PDFPrintable version
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Analysis of a business's financial statements, health, and market
This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.Find sources: "Fundamental analysis" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (July 2014) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
Part of a series onFinancial markets
Public market
Exchange · Securities
Bond market
Bond valuation
Corporate bond
Fixed income
Government bond
High-yield debt
Municipal bond
Securitization
Stock market
Common stock
Preferred stock
Registered share
Stock
Stock certificate
Stock exchange
Other markets
Derivatives (Credit derivativeFutures exchangeHybrid security)
Foreign exchange (CurrencyExchange rate)
Commodity
Money
Real estate
Reinsurance
Over-the-counter (off-exchange)
ForwardsOptions
Spot marketSwaps
Trading
Participants
Regulation
Clearing
Related areas
Banks and banking
Finance
corporate
personal
public
vte
Fundamental analysis, in accounting and finance, is the analysis of a business's financial statements (usually to analyze the business's assets, liabilities, and earnings); health; competitors and markets. It also considers the overall state of the economy and factors including interest rates, production, earnings, employment, GDP, housing, manufacturing and management. There are two basic approaches that can be used: bottom up analysis and top down analysis. These terms are used to distinguish such analysis from other types of investment analysis, such as quantitative and technical.
Fundamental analysis is performed on historical and present data, but with the goal of making financial forecasts. There are several possible objectives:
to conduct a company stock valuation and predict its probable price evolution;
to make a projection on its business performance;
to evaluate its management and make internal business decisions and/or to calculate its credit risk;
to find out the intrinsic value of the share.
The two analytical models[edit]
There are two basic methodologies investors rely upon when the objective of the analysis is to determine what stock to buy and at what price:
Fundamental analysis. Analysts maintain that markets may incorrectly price a security in the short run but the "correct" price will eventually be reached. Profits can be made by purchasing or selling the wrongly priced security and then waiting for the market to recognize its "mistake" and reprice the security.
Technical analysis. Analysts look at trends and price levels and believe that trend changes confirm sentiment changes. Recognizable price chart patterns may be found due to investors' emotional responses to price movements. Technical analysts mainly evaluate historical trends and ranges to predict future price movement.
Investors can use one or both of these complementary methods for stock picking. For example, many fundamental investors use technical indicators for deciding entry and exit points. Similarly, a large proportion of technical investors use fundamental indicators to limit their pool of possible stocks to "good" companies.
The choice of stock analysis is determined by the investor's belief in the different paradigms for "how the stock market works". For explanations of these paradigms, see the discussions at efficient-market hypothesis, random walk hypothesis, capital asset pricing model, Fed model, market-based valuation, and behavioral finance.
Fundamental analysis includes:
Economic analysis
Industry analysis
Company analysis
The intrinsic value of the shares is determined based upon these three analyses. It is this value that is considered the true value of the share. If the intrinsic value is higher than the market price,  buying the share is recommended. If it is equal to market price, it is recommended to hold the share; and if it is less than the market price, then one should sell the shares.
Use by different portfolio styles[edit]
Investors may also use fundamental analysis within different portfolio management styles.
Buy and hold investors believe that latching on to good businesses allows the investor's asset to grow with the business. Fundamental analysis lets them find "good" companies, so they lower their risk and the probability of wipe-out.
Value investors restrict their attention to under-valued companies, believing that "it's hard to fall out of a ditch".  The values they follow come from fundamental analysis.
Managers may use fundamental analysis to correctly value "good" and "bad" companies.
Managers may also consider the economic cycle in determining whether conditions are "right" to buy fundamentally suitable companies.
Contrarian investors hold that "in the short run, the market is a voting machine, not a weighing machine". Fundamental analysis allows an investor to make his or her own decision on value, while ignoring the opinions of the market.
Managers may use fundamental analysis to determine future growth rates for buying high priced growth stocks.
Managers may include fundamental factors along with technical factors in computer models (quantitative analysis).
Top-down and bottom-up approaches[edit]
Investors using fundamental analysis can use either a top-down or bottom-up approach.
The top-down investor starts their analysis with global economics, including both international and national economic indicators. These may include GDP growth rates, inflation, interest rates, exchange rates, productivity, and energy prices. They subsequently narrow their search to regional/ industry analysis of total sales, price levels, the effects of competing products, foreign competition, and entry or exit from the industry. Only then do they refine their search to the best business in the area being studied.
The bottom-up investor starts with specific businesses, regardless of their industry/region, and proceeds in reverse of the top-down approach.
Procedures[edit]
The analysis of a business's health starts with a financial statement analysis that includes financial ratios. It looks at dividends paid, operating cash flow, new equity issues and capital financing. The earnings estimates and growth rate projections published widely by Thomson Reuters and others can be considered either "fundamental" (they are facts) or "technical" (they are investor sentiment) based on perception of their validity.
Determined growth rates (of income and cash) and risk levels (to determine the discount rate) are used in various valuation models. The foremost is the discounted cash flow model, which calculates the present value of the future:
dividends received by the investor, along with the eventual sale price; (Gordon model)
earnings of the company;
or cash flows of the company.
The simple model commonly used is the P/E ratio (price-to-earnings ratio). Implicit in this model of a perpetual annuity (time value of money) is that the inverse, or the E/P rate, is the discount rate appropriate to the risk of the business. Usage of the P/E ratio has the disadvantage that it ignores future earnings growth.
Because the future growth of the free cash flow and earnings of a company drive the fair value of the company, the PEG ratio is more meaningful than the P/E ratio. The PEG ratio incorporates the growth estimates for future earnings, e.g. of the EBIT. Its validity depends on the length of time analysts believe the growth will continue and on the reasonableness of future estimates compared to earnings growth in the past years (oftentimes the last seven years). IGAR models can be used to impute expected changes in growth from current P/E and historical growth rates for the stocks relative to a comparison index.
The amount of debt a company possesses is also a major consideration in determining its financial leverage and its health. This is meaningful because a company can reach higher earnings (and this way a higher return on equity and higher P/E ratio) simply by increasing the amount of net debt. This can be quickly assessed using the debt-to-equity ratio, the current ratio (current assets/current liabilities) and the return on capital employed (ROCE). The ROCE is the ratio of EBIT divided by the "capital employed", i.e. all the current and non-current assets less the operating liabilities, which is the real capital of the company no matter if it is financed by equity or debt.
Criticisms[edit]
Economists such as Burton Malkiel suggest that neither fundamental analysis nor technical analysis is useful in outperforming the markets.
See also[edit]
Stock valuation
Lists of valuation topics
Security analysis
Piotroski F-score
Stock selection criterion
John Burr Williams#Theory
Mosaic theory
Financial forecast
References[edit]
^ "Technical Analysis vs. Fundamental Analysis". Market Technicians Association. Archived from the original on 12 March 2015. Retrieved 6 March 2015.
^ "An Introduction to Fundamental Analysis and the US Economy". InformedTrades.com. 2008-02-14. Archived from the original on 2009-07-21. Retrieved 2009-07-27.
^ Murphy, John J. (1999). Technical analysis of the financial markets : a comprehensive guide to trading methods and applications (2nd ed.). New York [u.a.]: New York Institute of Finance. ISBN 0735200661.
^ Graham, Benjamin; Dodd, David (December 10, 2004). Security Analysis. McGraw-Hill. ISBN 978-0-07-144820-8.
^ "Financial Concepts: Random Walk Theory". Investopedia.
External links[edit]
MIT Financial-Management course notes
Fundamental Analysis Works
vteFinancial marketsTypes of markets
Primary market
Secondary market
Third market
Fourth market
Types of stocks
Common stock
Golden share
Preferred stock
Restricted stock
Tracking stock
Share capital
Authorised capital
Issued shares
Shares outstanding
Treasury stock
Participants
Broker
Floor broker
Inter-dealer broker
Broker-dealer
Market maker
Trader
Floor trader
Proprietary trader
Quantitative analyst
Investor
Hedger
Speculator
Arbitrager
Scalper
Regulator
Trading venues
Exchange
List of stock exchanges
Trading hours
Over-the-counter (off-exchange)
Alternative Trading System (ATS)
Multilateral trading facility (MTF)
Electronic communication network (ECN)
Direct market access (DMA)
Straight-through processing (STP)
Dark pool (private exchange)
Crossing network
Liquidity aggregator
Stock valuation
Alpha
Arbitrage pricing theory (APT)
Beta
Buffett indicator (Cap-to-GDP)
Book value (BV)
Capital asset pricing model (CAPM)
Capital market line (CML)
Dividend discount model (DDM)
Dividend yield
Earnings yield
EV/EBITDA
Fed model
Net asset value (NAV)
Security characteristic line
Security market line (SML)
T-model
Trading theories and strategies
Algorithmic trading
Buy and hold
Contrarian investing
Dollar cost averaging
Efficient-market hypothesis (EMH)
Fundamental analysis
Growth stock
Market timing
Modern portfolio theory (MPT)
Momentum investing
Mosaic theory
Pairs trade
Post-modern portfolio theory (PMPT)
Random walk hypothesis (RMH)
Sector rotation
Style investing
Swing trading
Technical analysis
Trend following
Value averaging
Value investing
Related terms
Bid–ask spread
Block trade
Cross listing
Dividend
Dual-listed company
DuPont analysis
Efficient frontier
Financial law
Flight-to-quality
Government bond
Greenspan put
Haircut
Initial public offering (IPO)
Long
Mandatory offer
Margin
Market anomaly
Market capitalization
Market depth
Market manipulation
Market trend
Mean reversion
Momentum
Open outcry
Order book
Position
Public float
Public offering
Rally
Returns-based style analysis
Reverse stock split
Share repurchase
Short selling
Slippage
Speculation
Squeeze-out
Stock dilution
Stock exchange
Stock market index
Stock split
Stock swap
Trade
Tender offer
Uptick rule
Volatility
Voting interest
Yield
Authority control databases: National
Germany
Israel
United States
Czech Republic
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Fundamental_analysis&oldid=1216194882"
Categories: Fundamental analysisCommodity marketsDerivatives (finance)Foreign exchange marketStock marketHidden categories: Articles with short descriptionShort description matches WikidataArticles needing additional references from July 2014All articles needing additional referencesArticles with GND identifiersArticles with J9U identifiersArticles with LCCN identifiersArticles with NKC identifiers
This page was last edited on 29 March 2024, at 17:26 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 4.0;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Code of Conduct
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement
Mobile view
Toggle limited content width