Investor - Wikipedia
Jump to content
Main menu
Main menu
move to sidebar
hide
Navigation
Main pageContentsCurrent eventsRandom articleAbout WikipediaContact usDonate
Contribute
HelpLearn to editCommunity portalRecent changesUpload file
Search
Search
Create account
Log in
Personal tools
Create account Log in
Pages for logged out editors learn more
ContributionsTalk
Contents
move to sidebar
hide
(Top)
1Types of investors
2Investor protection through government
3Investment tax structures
4Role of the financier
Toggle Role of the financier subsection
4.1Perceptions
5See also
6Further reading
7References
8External links
Toggle the table of contents
Investor
33 languages
العربيةAzərbaycancaتۆرکجهবাংলাBân-lâm-gúČeštinaDanskDeutschEestiفارسیFrançais한국어हिन्दीBahasa IndonesiaҚазақшаКыргызчаLietuviųМакедонскиമലയാളംनेपाली日本語Norsk bokmålਪੰਜਾਬੀPolskiRomânăРусскийTagalogТатарча / tatarçaТоҷикӣУкраїнськаTiếng Việt粵語中文
Edit links
ArticleTalk
English
ReadEditView history
Tools
Tools
move to sidebar
hide
Actions
ReadEditView history
General
What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationCite this pageGet shortened URLDownload QR codeWikidata item
Print/export
Download as PDFPrintable version
In other projects
Wikimedia Commons
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Person who allocates capital with the expectation of a financial return
For the Swedish investment company, see Investor AB.
This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.Find sources: "Investor" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (March 2015) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
Part of a series onCapitalism
Concepts
Austerity
Business
Business cycle
Businessperson
Capital
Capital accumulation
Capital markets
Company
Corporation
Competitive markets
Economic interventionism
Economic liberalism
Economic surplus
Entrepreneurship
Fictitious capital
Financial market
Free price system
Free market
Goods and services
Investor
Invisible hand
Visible hand
Liberalization
Marginalism
Money
Private property
Privatization
Profit
Rent seeking
Supply and demand
Surplus value
Value
Wage labour
Economic systems
Anglo-Saxon
Authoritarian
Corporate
Dirigist
Free-market
Humanistic
Laissez-faire
Liberal
Libertarian
Market
Mercantilist
Mixed
Monopoly
National
Neoliberal
Nordic
Private
Raw
Regulated market
Regulatory
Rhine
Social
State
State-sponsored
Welfare
Economic theories
American
Austrian
Chartalism
MMT
Chicago
Classical
Institutional
Keynesian
Neo-
New
Post-
Market monetarism
Critique of political economy
Critique of work
Marxist
Monetarist
Neoclassical
New institutional
Supply-side
Origins
Age of Enlightenment
Capitalism and Islam
Commercial Revolution
Feudalism
Industrial Revolution
Mercantilism
Primitive accumulation
Physiocracy
Simple commodity production
Development
Advanced
Consumer
Community
Corporate
Crony
Finance
Global
Illiberal
Late
Marxist
Merchant
Progressive
Rentier
State monopoly
Technological
People
Smith
Mill
Ricardo
Malthus
Say
Marx
Friedman
Hayek
Keynes
Marshall
Pareto
Walras
von Mises
Rand
Rothbard
Schumpeter
Veblen
Weber
Coase
Related topics
Anti-capitalism
Capitalist propaganda
Capitalist realism
Capitalist state
Consumerism
Crisis theory
Criticism of capitalism
Critique of political economy
Critique of work
Cronyism
Culture of capitalism
Evergreening
Exploitation of labour
Globalization
History
History of theory
Market economy
Periodizations of capitalism
Perspectives on capitalism
Post-capitalism
Speculation
Spontaneous order
Venture philanthropy
Wage slavery
Ideologies
Anarcho
Authoritarian
Classical liberalism
Democratic
Dirigisme
Eco
Humanistic
Inclusive
Liberal
Liberalism
Libertarian
Neo
Neoliberalism
Objectivism
Ordoliberalism
Privatism
Right-libertarianism
Third Way
Capitalism portal
Business portalvte
Financial market participants
Organisations
Credit unions
Insurance companies
Investment banks
Investment funds
Pension funds
Prime brokers
Trusts
Terms
Finance
Financial market
Participants
Corporate finance
Personal finance
Public finance
Banks and banking
Financial regulation
Fund governance
Stock Market
Part of a series onFinance
Markets
Assets
Bond
Commodity
Derivatives
Foreign exchange
Money
Over-the-counter
Private equity
Real estate
Spot
Stock
Participants
Investor
institutional
Retail
Speculator
Locations
Financial centres
Offshore financial centres
Conduit and sink OFCs
Instruments
Bond
Cash
Collateralised debt obligation
Credit default swap
Time deposit (certificate of deposit)
Credit line
Deposit
Derivative
Futures contract
Indemnity
Insurance
Letter of credit
Loan
Mortgage
Option (callexoticput)
Performance bonds
Repurchase agreement
Stock
Security
Syndicated loan
Synthetic CDO
Corporate
General
Accounting
Audit
Capital budgeting
Credit rating agency
Risk management
Financial statements
Transactions
Leveraged buyout
Mergers and acquisitions
Structured finance
Venture capital
Taxation
Base erosion and profit shifting (BEPS)
Corporate tax haven
Tax inversion
Tax haven
Transfer pricing
Personal
Credit / Debt
Employment contract
Financial planning
RetirementStudent loan
Public
Government spending
Final consumption expenditure
OperationsRedistribution
Transfer payment
Government revenue
TaxationDeficit spending
Budget (balance)Debt
Non-tax revenue
Warrant of payment
Banking
Central bank
Deposit account
Fractional-reserve
Full-reserve
Loan
Money supply
Lists of banks
Bank regulation
Banking license
Basel Accords
Bank for International Settlements
Financial Stability Board
Deposit insurance
Separation of investment and retail banking
Regulation · Financial law
International Financial Reporting Standards
ISO 31000
Professional certification
Fund governance
Economic history
Private equity and venture capital
Recession
Stock market bubble
Stock market crash
Accounting scandals
Business and Economics portal
Money portalvte
An investor is a person who allocates financial capital with the expectation of a future return (profit) or to gain an advantage (interest). Through this allocated capital the investor usually purchases some species of property. Types of investments include equity, debt, securities, real estate, infrastructure, currency, commodity, token, derivatives such as put and call options, futures, forwards, etc. This definition makes no distinction between the investors in the primary and secondary markets.  That is, someone who provides a business with capital and someone who buys a stock are both investors.  An investor who owns stock is a shareholder.
Types of investors[edit]
There are two types of investors: retail investors and institutional investors.
A retail investor is also known as an individual investor.
There are several sub-types of institutional investor:
Pension plans making investments on behalf of employees
Businesses that make investments, either directly or via a captive fund
Endowment funds used by universities, churches, etc.
Mutual funds, hedge funds, and other funds, ownership of which may or may not be publicly traded (these funds typically pool money raised from their owner-subscribers to invest in securities)
Sovereign wealth funds
Large money managers
Investors might also be classified according to their profiles. In this respect, an important distinctive investor psychology trait is risk attitude.
Investor protection through government[edit]
Investor protection through government involves regulations and enforcement by government agencies to ensure that market is fair and fraudulent activities are eliminated.  An example of a government agency that protects investors is the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), which works to protect reasonable investors in the United States.
Similar protections exist in other countries, including the United Kingdom where individual investors have certain protections via the Financial Services Compensation Scheme (FSCS).
Investment tax structures[edit]
Company dividends are paid from net income, which has the tax already deducted. Therefore, shareholders are given some respite with a preferential tax rate of 15% on "qualified dividends" in the event of the company being domiciled in the United States. Alternatively, in another country having a double-taxation treaty with the US, accepted by the Internal Revenue Service (IRS). Non-qualified dividends paid by other foreign companies or entities; for example, those receiving income derived from interest on bonds held by a mutual fund, are taxed at the regular and generally higher rate of income tax. When applied to 2013, this is on a sliding scale up to 39.6%, with an additional 3.8% surtax for high-income taxpayers ($200,000 for singles, $250,000 for married couples).
Role of the financier[edit]
"Financier" redirects here. For other uses, see Financier (disambiguation).
A financier (/fɪnənˈsɪər, fə-, -ˈnæn-/) is a person whose primary occupation is either facilitating or directly providing investments to up-and-coming or established companies and businesses, typically involving large sums of money and usually involving private equity and venture capital, mergers and acquisitions, leveraged buyouts, corporate finance, investment banking, or large-scale asset management. A financier makes money through this process when his or her investment is paid back with interest, from part of the company's equity awarded to them as specified by the business deal, or a financier can generate income through commission, performance, and management fees. A financier can also promote the success of a financed business by allowing the business to take advantage of the financier's reputation. The more experienced and capable the financier is, the more the financier will be able to contribute to the success of the financed entity, and the greater reward the financier will reap. The term, financier, is French, and derives from finance or payment.
Financier is someone who handles money. Certain financier avenues require degrees and licenses including venture capitalists, hedge fund managers, trust fund managers, accountants, stockbrokers, financial advisors, or even public treasurers. Personal investing on the other hand, has no requirements and is open to all using the stock market or by word-of-mouth requests for money. A financier "will be a specialized financial intermediary in the sense that it has experience in liquidating the type of firm it is lending to".
Perceptions[edit]
Economist Edmund Phelps has argued that the financier plays a role in directing capital to investments that governments and social organizations are constrained from playing:
[T]he pluralism of experience that the financiers bring to bear in their decisions gives a wide range of entrepreneurial ideas a chance for insightful evaluation. And, importantly, the financier and the entrepreneur do not need the state's or social partners' approval. Nor are they accountable later on to such social bodies if the project goes badly, not even to the financier's investors. So projects that would be too opaque and uncertain for the state or social partners to endorse can be undertaken.
The concept of the financier has been distinguished from that of a mere capitalist based on the asserted higher level of judgment required of the financier. However, financiers have also been mocked for their perceived tendency to generate wealth at the expense of others, and without engaging in tangible labor. For example, humorist George Helgesen Fitch described the financier as "a man who can make two dollars grow for himself where one grew for someone else before".
See also[edit]
Accredited investor – Investor with a special legal status
Compound interest – Compounding sum paid for the use of money
Crowd funding – Collection of finance from backers to fund an initiativePages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets
Financial literacy – Able to make informed choices about money
Institutional investor – Investors who invest professionally and as their main occupation in the stock market
Investor–state dispute settlement – Rules for suing countries by foreign investors
Growth capital – Type of private equity investment
Model audit – Colloquial term for the tasks performed when conducting due diligence on a financial model
Philanthrocapitalism – Method of philanthropy that mirrors a for-profit business
Real estate investing – Buying and selling real estate for profit
Saving account – Type of bank accountPages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets
Securities offering – Discrete round of investment
Socially responsible investing – Any investment strategy combining both financial performance and social/ethical impact.
Stock investor – Person or company involved in trading equity securitiesPages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets
Time value of money – Conjecture that there is greater benefit to receiving a sum of money now rather than later
Further reading[edit]
Josephson, Matthew (1972). The Money Lords: The Great Finance Capitalists, 1925–1950. New York: Weybright and Talley.
Graham, Benjamin; Zweig, Jason (February 21, 2006) . The Intelligent Investor: The Definitive Book on Value Investing (Revised ed.). HarperCollins. ISBN 0-06-055566-1.
References[edit]
^ a b Lin, Tom C.W. (2015). "Reasonable Investor(s)". Boston University Law Review. 95 (461): 466.
^ "Investor". Cambridge English Dictionary. Cambridge University Press. Retrieved November 29, 2019.
^ Fisher, Jonathan; Bewsey, Jane; Waters, Malcolm; Ovey, Elizabeth (2003). The Law of Investor Protection (2nd ed.). London: Sweet & Maxwell.
^ Palmer, Barclay (August 11, 2023). "Institutional vs. Retail Investors: What's the Difference?". Investopedia. Retrieved October 5, 2023.
^ Hayes, Adam. "Retail Investor Definition". Investopedia. Retrieved December 17, 2020.
^ "Institutional Investor – Overview, Types, Investing Risks". Corporate Finance Institute. Retrieved December 17, 2020.
^ "Investments". Financial Services Compensation Scheme Ltd. Retrieved November 11, 2023.
^ "Investment Tax Basics for All Investors". Investopedia. Retrieved December 30, 2014.
^ "financier". The American Heritage Dictionary. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt Publishing Company.
^ "financier | meaning of financier". Longman Dictionary of Contemporary English.
^ a b Xavier Freixas, Jean-Charles Rochet, Microeconomics of Banking (2008), p. 227.
^ Landström, Hans (2007). Handbook of Research on Venture Capital. p. 202.
^ Neave, Edwin H. (2009). Modern Financial Systems: Theory and Applications. p. 8.
^ Phelps, Edmund S. (October 10, 2006). "Dynamic Capitalism" (PDF). Europa-Institut.
^ Elliott, Sterling, ed. (1896). Good Roads: Devoted to the Construction and Maintenance of Roads. Vol. 24. p. 366.
^ Fitch, George (1916). Vest Pocket Essays. p. 123.
External links[edit]
Media related to Investors at Wikimedia Commons
vteFinancial marketsTypes of markets
Primary market
Secondary market
Third market
Fourth market
Types of stocks
Common stock
Golden share
Preferred stock
Restricted stock
Tracking stock
Share capital
Authorised capital
Issued shares
Shares outstanding
Treasury stock
Participants
Broker
Floor broker
Inter-dealer broker
Broker-dealer
Market maker
Trader
Floor trader
Proprietary trader
Quantitative analyst
Investor
Hedger
Speculator
Arbitrager
Scalper
Regulator
Trading venues
Exchange
List of stock exchanges
Trading hours
Over-the-counter (off-exchange)
Alternative Trading System (ATS)
Multilateral trading facility (MTF)
Electronic communication network (ECN)
Direct market access (DMA)
Straight-through processing (STP)
Dark pool (private exchange)
Crossing network
Liquidity aggregator
Stock valuation
Alpha
Arbitrage pricing theory (APT)
Beta
Buffett indicator (Cap-to-GDP)
Book value (BV)
Capital asset pricing model (CAPM)
Capital market line (CML)
Dividend discount model (DDM)
Dividend yield
Earnings yield
EV/EBITDA
Fed model
Net asset value (NAV)
Security characteristic line
Security market line (SML)
T-model
Trading theories and strategies
Algorithmic trading
Buy and hold
Contrarian investing
Dollar cost averaging
Efficient-market hypothesis (EMH)
Fundamental analysis
Growth stock
Market timing
Modern portfolio theory (MPT)
Momentum investing
Mosaic theory
Pairs trade
Post-modern portfolio theory (PMPT)
Random walk hypothesis (RMH)
Sector rotation
Style investing
Swing trading
Technical analysis
Trend following
Value averaging
Value investing
Related terms
Bid–ask spread
Block trade
Cross listing
Dividend
Dual-listed company
DuPont analysis
Efficient frontier
Financial law
Flight-to-quality
Government bond
Greenspan put
Haircut
Initial public offering (IPO)
Long
Mandatory offer
Margin
Market anomaly
Market capitalization
Market depth
Market manipulation
Market trend
Mean reversion
Momentum
Open outcry
Order book
Position
Public float
Public offering
Rally
Returns-based style analysis
Reverse stock split
Share repurchase
Short selling
Slippage
Speculation
Squeeze-out
Stock dilution
Stock exchange
Stock market index
Stock split
Stock swap
Trade
Tender offer
Uptick rule
Volatility
Voting interest
Yield
Authority control databases: National
Germany
United States
Latvia
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Investor&oldid=1210057290"
Categories: Finance occupationsFinancial services occupationsInvestment fundsInvestorsHidden categories: Articles with short descriptionShort description matches WikidataUse American English from April 2023All Wikipedia articles written in American EnglishUse mdy dates from April 2023Articles needing additional references from March 2015All articles needing additional referencesPages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets via Module:Annotated linkCommons category link from WikidataArticles with GND identifiersArticles with LCCN identifiersArticles with LNB identifiers
This page was last edited on 24 February 2024, at 20:15 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 4.0;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Code of Conduct
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement
Mobile view
Toggle limited content width