Margin (finance) - Wikipedia
Jump to content
Main menu
Main menu
move to sidebar
hide
Navigation
Main pageContentsCurrent eventsRandom articleAbout WikipediaContact usDonate
Contribute
HelpLearn to editCommunity portalRecent changesUpload file
Search
Search
Create account
Log in
Personal tools
Create account Log in
Pages for logged out editors learn more
ContributionsTalk
Contents
move to sidebar
hide
(Top)
1Margin account
2Margin buying
3Short selling
4Types of margin requirements
5Margin strategies
6Initial and maintenance margin requirements
7Margin call
8Price of stock for margin calls
9Reduced margins
10Margin-equity ratio
11Return on margin
12See also
13References
Toggle the table of contents
Margin (finance)
34 languages
العربيةAzərbaycancaБеларускаяБългарскиCatalàČeštinaDeutschEspañolEuskaraفارسیGaeilge한국어Bahasa IndonesiaÍslenskaItalianoКыргызчаLatviešuLietuviųമലയാളംनेपाली日本語Norsk bokmålOʻzbekcha / ўзбекчаPortuguêsРусскийSlovenčinaSlovenščinaSvenskaТоҷикӣTürkçeУкраїнськаTiếng Việt粵語中文
Edit links
ArticleTalk
English
ReadEditView history
Tools
Tools
move to sidebar
hide
Actions
ReadEditView history
General
What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationCite this pageGet shortened URLDownload QR codeWikidata item
Print/export
Download as PDFPrintable version
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Type of financial collateral used to cover credit risk
This article is about financial trading. For the economic theory, see Margin (economics).
This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.Find sources: "Margin" finance – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (February 2021) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
In finance, margin is the collateral that a holder of a financial instrument has to deposit with a counterparty (most often their broker or an exchange) to cover some or all of the credit risk the holder poses for the counterparty. This risk can arise if the holder has done any of the following:
Borrowed cash from the counterparty to buy financial instruments,
Borrowed financial instruments to sell them short,
Entered into a derivative contract.
The collateral for a margin account can be the cash deposited in the account or securities provided, and represents the funds available to the account holder for further share trading. On United States futures exchanges, margins were formerly called performance bonds. Most of the exchanges today use SPAN ("Standard Portfolio Analysis of Risk") methodology, which was developed by the Chicago Mercantile Exchange in 1988, for calculating margins for options and futures.
Margin account[edit]
A margin account is a loan account with a broker which can be used for share trading. The funds available under the margin loan are determined by the broker based on the securities owned and provided by the trader, which act as collateral for the loan. The broker usually has the right to change the percentage of the value of each security it will allow toward further advances to the trader, and may consequently make a margin call if the balance available falls below the amount actually utilised. In any event, the broker will usually charge interest and other fees on the amount drawn on the margin account.
If the cash balance of a margin account is negative, the amount is owed to the broker, and usually attracts interest. If the cash balance is positive, the money is available to the account holder to reinvest, or may be withdrawn by the holder or left in the account and may earn interest. In terms of futures and cleared derivatives, the margin balance would refer to the total value of collateral pledged to the CCP (central counterparty clearing) and or futures commission merchants.
Margin buying[edit]
Margin buying refers to the buying of securities with cash borrowed from a broker, using the bought securities as collateral. This has the effect of magnifying any profit or loss made on the securities. The securities serve as collateral for the loan. The net value—the difference between the value of the securities and the loan—is initially equal to the amount of one's own cash used. This difference has to stay above a minimum margin requirement, the purpose of which is to protect the broker against a fall in the value of the securities to the point that the investor can no longer cover the loan.
Margin lending became popular in the late 2800s as a means to finance railroads. In the 1920s, margin requirements were loose. In other words, brokers required investors to put in very little of their own money, whereas today, the Federal Reserve's margin requirement (under Regulation T) limits debt to 50 percent. During the 1920s leverage rates of up to 90 percent debt were not uncommon. When the stock market started to contract, many individuals received margin calls. They had to deliver more money to their brokers or their shares would be sold. Since many individuals did not have the equity to cover their margin positions, their shares were sold, causing further market declines and further margin calls. This was one of the major contributing factors which led to the Stock Market Crash of 1929, which in turn contributed to the Great Depression. However, as reported in Peter Rappoport and Eugene N. White's 1994 paper published in The American Economic Review, "Was the Crash of 1929 Expected", all sources indicate that beginning in either late 1928 or early 1929, "margin requirements began to rise to historic new levels. The typical peak rates on brokers' loans were 40–50 percent. Brokerage houses followed suit and demanded higher margin from investors".
For example, Jane buys a share in a company for $100 using $20 of her own money and $80 borrowed from her broker. The net value (the share price minus the amount borrowed) is $20. The broker has a minimum margin requirement of $10. Suppose the share price drops to $85. The net value is now only $5 (the previous net value of $20 minus the share's $15 drop in price), so, to maintain the broker's minimum margin, Jane needs to increase this net value to $10 or more, either by selling the share or repaying part of the loan.
Short selling[edit]
Main article: Short selling
Short selling refers to the selling of securities that the trader does not own, borrowing them from a broker, and using the cash as collateral. This has the effect of reversing any profit or loss made on the securities. The initial cash deposited by the trader, together with the amount obtained from the sale, serve as collateral for the loan. The net value—the difference between the cash amount and the value of loan security—is initially equal to the amount of one's own cash used. This difference has to stay above a minimum margin requirement, the purpose of which is to protect the broker against a rise in the value of the borrowed securities to the point that the investor can no longer cover the loan.
For example, Jane sells a share of stock she does not own for $100 and puts $20 of her own money as collateral, resulting $120 cash in the account. The net value (the cash amount minus the share price) is $20. The broker has a minimum margin requirement of $10. Suppose the share price rises to $115. The net value is now only $5 (the previous net value of $20 minus the share's $15 rise in price), so, to maintain the broker's minimum margin, Jane needs to increase this net value to $10 or more, either by buying the share back or depositing additional cash.
Types of margin requirements[edit]
The current liquidating margin is the value of a security's position if the position were liquidated now. In other words, if the holder has a short position, this is the money needed to buy back; if they are long, it is the money they can raise by selling it.
The variation margin or mark to market is not collateral, but a daily payment of profits and losses. Futures are marked-to-market every day, so the current price is compared to the previous day's price. The profit or loss on the day of a position is then paid to or debited from the holder by the futures exchange. This is possible, because the exchange is the central counterparty to all contracts, and the number of long contracts equals the number of short contracts. Certain other exchange traded derivatives, such as options on futures contracts, are marked-to-market in the same way.
The seller of an option has the obligation to deliver the underlying security associated with the option when it is exercised. To ensure they can fulfill this obligation, they have to deposit collateral. This premium margin is equal to the premium that they would need to pay to buy back the option and close out their position.
Additional margin is intended to cover a potential fall in the value of the position on the following trading day. This is calculated as the potential loss in a worst-case scenario.
SMA and portfolio margins offer alternative rules for U.S. and NYSE regulatory margin requirements.[clarification needed]
Margin strategies[edit]
Enhanced leverage is a strategy offered by some brokers that provides 4:1 or 6+:1 leverage. This requires maintaining two sets of accounts, long and short.
Example 1
An investor sells a put option, where the buyer has the right to require the seller to buy his 100 shares in Universal Widgets S.A. at 90¢. He receives an option premium of 14¢. The value of the option is 14¢, so this is the premium margin. The exchange has calculated, using historical prices, that the option value will not exceed 17¢ the next day, with 99% certainty. Therefore, the additional margin requirement is set at 3¢, and the investor has to post at least 14¢ (obtained from the sale) + 3¢ = 17¢ in his margin account as collateral.
Example 2
Futures contracts on sweet crude oil closed the day at $65. The exchange sets the additional margin requirement at $2, which the holder of a long position pays as collateral in his margin account. A day later, the futures close at $66. The exchange now pays the profit of $1 in the mark-to-market to the holder. The margin account still holds only the $2.
Example 3
An investor is long 50 shares in Universal Widgets Ltd, trading at 120 pence (£1.20) each. The broker sets an additional margin requirement of 20 pence per share, so £10 for the total position. The current liquidating margin is currently £60 "in favour of the investor". The minimum margin requirement is now -£60 + £10 = -£50. In other words, the investor can run a deficit of £50 in his margin account and still fulfil his margin obligations. This is the same as saying he can borrow up to £50 from the broker.
Initial and maintenance margin requirements[edit]
The initial margin requirement is the amount of collateral required to open a position. Thereafter, the collateral required until the position is closed is the maintenance requirement. The maintenance requirement is the minimum amount of collateral required to keep the position open and is generally lower than the initial requirement. This allows the price to move against the margin without forcing a margin call immediately after the initial transaction. When the total value of the collateral dips below the maintenance margin requirement, the position holder must pledge additional collateral to bring their total balance back up to or above the initial margin requirement.  On instruments determined to be especially risky, however, either regulators, the exchange, or the broker may set the maintenance requirement higher than normal or equal to the initial requirement to reduce their exposure to the risk accepted by the trader. For speculative futures and derivatives clearing accounts futures commission merchants may charge a premium or margin multiplier to exchange requirements. This is typically an additional 10%–25%.
Margin call[edit]
"Margin call" redirects here. For the 2011 film, see Margin Call.
The broker may at any time revise the value of the collateral securities (margin) after the estimation of the risk, based, for example, on market factors. If this results in the market value of the collateral securities for a margin account falling below the revised margin, the broker or exchange immediately issues a "margin call", requiring the investor to bring the margin account back into line. To do so, the investor must either pay funds (the call) into the margin account, provide additional collateral, or dispose some of the securities. If the investor fails to bring the account back into line, the broker can sell the investor's collateral securities to bring the account back into line.
If a margin call occurs unexpectedly, it can cause a domino effect of selling, which will lead to other margin calls and so forth, effectively crashing an asset class or group of asset classes. The "Bunker Hunt Day" crash of the silver market on Silver Thursday, March 27, 1980, is one such example. This situation most frequently happens as a result of an adverse change in the market value of the leveraged asset or contract. It could also happen when the margin requirement is raised, either due to increased volatility or due to legislation. In extreme cases, certain securities may cease to qualify for margin trading; in such a case, the brokerage will require the trader to either fully fund their position, or to liquidate it.
Price of stock for margin calls[edit]
The minimum margin requirement, sometimes called the maintenance margin requirement, is the ratio of (stock equity − leveraged dollars) to stock equity, where "stock equity" is the stock price multiplied by the number of shares bought and "leveraged dollars" is the amount borrowed in the margin account.
For instance, assume that an investor bought 1,000 shares of a company each priced at $50. If the initial margin requirement were 60%, then stock equity = $50 × 1,000 = $50,000 and leveraged dollars (or amount borrowed) = $50,000 × (100% − 60%) = $20,000.
If the maintenance margin changed to 25%, then the customer would have to maintain a net value equal to 25% of the total stock equity. That means that he or she would have to maintain net equity of $50,000 × 0.25 = $12,500. At what price would the investor get a margin call? For stock price P the stock equity would be (in this example) 1,000P.
(Current Market Value − Amount Borrowed) / Current Market Value = 25%
(1,000P - 20,000) / 1000P = 0.25
(1,000P - 20,000) = 250P
750P = 20,000
P = 20,000/750 = 26.67
So if the stock price dropped from $50 to $26.67, then the investor would be called to add additional funds to the account to make up for the loss in stock equity.
Alternatively, one can calculate P using
initial margin requirement
maintenance margin requirement
{\displaystyle \textstyle P=P_{0}{\frac {(1-{\text{initial margin requirement}})}{(1-{\text{maintenance margin requirement}})}}}
where P0 is the initial price of the stock. Using the same example to demonstrate this:
50
0.6
0.25
26.66.
{\displaystyle P=\$50{\frac {(1-0.6)}{(1-0.25)}}=\$26.66.}
Reduced margins[edit]
Margin requirements are reduced for positions that offset each other. For instance spread traders who have offsetting futures contracts do not have to deposit collateral both for their short position and their long position. The exchange calculates the loss in a worst-case scenario of the total position. Similarly an investor who creates a collar has reduced risk since any loss on the call is offset by a gain in the stock, and a large loss in the stock is offset by a gain on the put; in general, covered calls have less strict requirements than naked call writing.
Margin-equity ratio[edit]
The margin-equity ratio is a term used by speculators, representing the amount of their trading capital that is being held as margin at any particular time. Traders would rarely (and unadvisedly) hold 100% of their capital as margin. The probability of losing their entire capital at some point would be high. By contrast, if the margin-equity ratio is so low as to make the trader's capital equal to the value of the futures contract itself, then they would not profit from the inherent leverage implicit in futures trading. A conservative trader might hold a margin-equity ratio of 15%, while a more aggressive trader might hold 40%.
Return on margin[edit]
Return on margin (ROM) is often used to judge performance because it represents the net gain or net loss compared to the exchange's perceived risk as reflected in required margin. ROM may be calculated (realized return) / (initial margin). The annualized ROM is equal to
(ROM + 1)(1/trade duration in years) - 1
For example, if a trader earns 10% on margin in two months, that would be about 77% annualized
Annualized ROM = (ROM +1)1/(2/12) - 1
that is, Annualized ROM = 1.16 - 1 = 77%
Sometimes, return on margin will also take into account peripheral charges such as brokerage fees and interest paid on the sum borrowed.  The margin interest rate is usually based on the broker's call.
See also[edit]
Badla system (Indian stock markets)
Collateral management
Credit default swap
Leverage (finance)
LIBOR
Margin at risk
MVA, the x-Valuation Adjustment related to Margin
Portfolio margin
Repurchase agreement
Special memorandum account
Short selling
References[edit]
^ Ruby Day (26 August 2019). "Blue Ocean Strategy & Finance: Margin Lending". Innowiki. Retrieved 4 September 2022.
^ a b Cundiff, Kirby R. (January 2007). "Monetary-Policy Disasters of the Twentieth Century". The Freeman Online. Retrieved 10 February 2009.
^ Rappoport, Peter; White, Eugene N. (March 1994). "Was the Crash of 1929 Expected". The American Economic Review. 84 (1). United States: American Economic Association: 271–281. JSTOR 2117982.
vteDerivatives marketDerivative (finance)OptionsTerms
Delta neutral
Exercise
Expiration
Moneyness
Open interest
Pin risk
Risk-free interest rate
Strike price
Synthetic position
the Greeks
Volatility
Vanillas
American
Bond option
Call
Employee stock option
European
Fixed income
FX
Option styles
Put
Warrants
Exotics
Asian
Barrier
Basket
Binary
Callable bull/bear contract
Chooser
Cliquet
Commodore
Compound
Forward start
Interest rate
Lookback
Mountain range
Rainbow
Spread
Swaption
Strategies
Backspread
Box spread
Butterfly
Calendar spread
Collar
Condor
Covered option
Credit spread
Debit spread
Diagonal spread
Fence
Intermarket spread
Iron butterfly
Iron condor
Jelly roll
Ladder
Naked option
Straddle
Strangle
Protective option
Ratio spread
Risk reversal
Vertical spread (Bear, Bull)
Valuation
Bachelier
Binomial
Black
Black–Scholes (equation)
Finite difference
Garman–Kohlhagen
Heston
Lattices
Margrabe
Put–call parity
MC Simulation
Real options
Trinomial
Vanna–Volga
Swaps
Amortising
Asset
Basis
Commodity
Conditional variance
Constant maturity
Correlation
Credit default
Currency
Dividend
Equity
Forex
Forward Rate Agreement
Inflation
Interest rate
Overnight indexed
Total return
Variance
Volatility
Year-on-Year Inflation-Indexed
Zero Coupon
Zero Coupon Inflation-Indexed
ForwardsFutures
Contango
Commodities future
Currency future
Dividend future
Forward market
Forward price
Forwards pricing
Forward rate
Futures pricing
Interest rate future
Margin
Normal backwardation
Perpetual futures
Single-stock futures
Slippage
Stock market index future
Exotic derivatives
Commodity derivative
Energy derivative
Freight derivative
Inflation derivative
Property derivative
Weather derivative
Other derivatives
Collateralized debt obligation (CDO)
Constant proportion portfolio insurance
Contract for difference
Credit-linked note (CLN)
Credit default option
Credit derivative
Equity-linked note (ELN)
Equity derivative
Foreign exchange derivative
Fund derivative
Fund of funds
Interest rate derivative
Mortgage-backed security
Power reverse dual-currency note (PRDC)
Market issues
Consumer debt
Corporate debt
Government debt
Great Recession
Municipal debt
Tax policy
Business portal
vteFinancial marketsTypes of markets
Primary market
Secondary market
Third market
Fourth market
Types of stocks
Common stock
Golden share
Preferred stock
Restricted stock
Tracking stock
Share capital
Authorised capital
Issued shares
Shares outstanding
Treasury stock
Participants
Broker
Floor broker
Inter-dealer broker
Broker-dealer
Market maker
Trader
Floor trader
Proprietary trader
Quantitative analyst
Investor
Hedger
Speculator
Arbitrager
Scalper
Regulator
Trading venues
Exchange
List of stock exchanges
Trading hours
Over-the-counter (off-exchange)
Alternative Trading System (ATS)
Multilateral trading facility (MTF)
Electronic communication network (ECN)
Direct market access (DMA)
Straight-through processing (STP)
Dark pool (private exchange)
Crossing network
Liquidity aggregator
Stock valuation
Alpha
Arbitrage pricing theory (APT)
Beta
Buffett indicator (Cap-to-GDP)
Book value (BV)
Capital asset pricing model (CAPM)
Capital market line (CML)
Dividend discount model (DDM)
Dividend yield
Earnings yield
EV/EBITDA
Fed model
Net asset value (NAV)
Security characteristic line
Security market line (SML)
T-model
Trading theories and strategies
Algorithmic trading
Buy and hold
Contrarian investing
Dollar cost averaging
Efficient-market hypothesis (EMH)
Fundamental analysis
Growth stock
Market timing
Modern portfolio theory (MPT)
Momentum investing
Mosaic theory
Pairs trade
Post-modern portfolio theory (PMPT)
Random walk hypothesis (RMH)
Sector rotation
Style investing
Swing trading
Technical analysis
Trend following
Value averaging
Value investing
Related terms
Bid–ask spread
Block trade
Cross listing
Dividend
Dual-listed company
DuPont analysis
Efficient frontier
Financial law
Flight-to-quality
Government bond
Greenspan put
Haircut
Initial public offering (IPO)
Long
Mandatory offer
Margin
Market anomaly
Market capitalization
Market depth
Market manipulation
Market trend
Mean reversion
Momentum
Open outcry
Order book
Position
Public float
Public offering
Rally
Returns-based style analysis
Reverse stock split
Share repurchase
Short selling
Slippage
Speculation
Squeeze-out
Stock dilution
Stock exchange
Stock market index
Stock split
Stock swap
Trade
Tender offer
Uptick rule
Volatility
Voting interest
Yield
Authority control databases: National
Germany
Japan
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Margin_(finance)&oldid=1218031240"
Categories: Financial marketsMargin policyCredit riskHidden categories: Articles with short descriptionShort description matches WikidataArticles needing additional references from February 2021All articles needing additional referencesUse dmy dates from March 2014Wikipedia articles needing clarification from April 2012Articles with GND identifiersArticles with NDL identifiers
This page was last edited on 9 April 2024, at 09:26 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 4.0;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Code of Conduct
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement
Mobile view
Toggle limited content width