Market maker - Wikipedia
Jump to content
Main menu
Main menu
move to sidebar
hide
Navigation
Main pageContentsCurrent eventsRandom articleAbout WikipediaContact usDonate
Contribute
HelpLearn to editCommunity portalRecent changesUpload file
Search
Search
Create account
Log in
Personal tools
Create account Log in
Pages for logged out editors learn more
ContributionsTalk
Contents
move to sidebar
hide
(Top)
1In currency exchange
2In stock exchange
Toggle In stock exchange subsection
2.1New York
2.2London
2.3Frankfurt
2.4Tokyo
3Decentralized network protocols
4Income of market makers
5See also
6References
7External links
Toggle the table of contents
Market maker
24 languages
العربيةAzərbaycancaCatalàČeštinaDeutschEspañolفارسیFrançaisÍslenskaItalianoעבריתҚазақшаLietuviųNederlandsनेपाली日本語Norsk bokmålPolskiPortuguêsРусскийSuomiSvenskaУкраїнська中文
Edit links
ArticleTalk
English
ReadEditView history
Tools
Tools
move to sidebar
hide
Actions
ReadEditView history
General
What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationCite this pageGet shortened URLDownload QR codeWikidata item
Print/export
Download as PDFPrintable version
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Stock market trading entity
Part of a series onFinancial markets
Public market
Exchange · Securities
Bond market
Bond valuation
Corporate bond
Fixed income
Government bond
High-yield debt
Municipal bond
Securitization
Stock market
Common stock
Preferred stock
Registered share
Stock
Stock certificate
Stock exchange
Other markets
Derivatives (Credit derivativeFutures exchangeHybrid security)
Foreign exchange (CurrencyExchange rate)
Commodity
Money
Real estate
Reinsurance
Over-the-counter (off-exchange)
ForwardsOptions
Spot marketSwaps
Trading
Participants
Regulation
Clearing
Related areas
Banks and banking
Finance
corporate
personal
public
vte
A market maker or liquidity provider is a company or an individual that quotes both a buy and a sell price in a tradable asset held in inventory, hoping to make a profit on the bid–ask spread, or turn. The benefit to the firm is that it makes money from doing so; the benefit to the market is that this helps limit price variation (volatility) by setting a limited trading price range for the assets being traded.
In U.S. markets, the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission defines a "market maker" as a firm that stands ready to buy and sell stock on a regular and continuous basis at a publicly quoted price. A Designated Primary Market Maker (DPM) is a specialized market maker approved by an exchange to guarantee that they will take a position in a particular assigned security, option, or option index.
In currency exchange[edit]
Most foreign exchange trading firms are market makers, as are many banks. The foreign exchange market maker both buys foreign currency from clients and then sells it to other clients. They derive income from the price differentials on such trades, as well as for the service of providing liquidity, reducing transaction costs, and facilitating trade.
In stock exchange[edit]
Market makers that stand ready to buy and sell stocks listed on an exchange, such as the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE) or the London Stock Exchange (LSE), are called "third market makers". Most stock exchanges operate on a "matched bargain" or "order driven" basis. When a buyer's bid price meets a seller's offer price or vice versa, the stock exchange's matching system decides that a deal has been executed. In such a system, there may be no designated or official market makers, but market makers nevertheless exist.[citation needed]
As of October 2008,[update] there were over two thousand market makers in the United States, and over a hundred in Canada.
New York[edit]
In the United States, the New York Stock Exchange and American Stock Exchange (AMEX), among others, have designated market makers, formerly known as "specialists", who act as the official market maker for a given security. The market makers provide a required amount of liquidity to the security's market, and take the other side of trades when there are short-term buy-and-sell-side imbalances in customer orders. In return, the specialist is granted various informational and trade execution advantages.
Other U.S. exchanges, most prominently the NASDAQ stock exchange, employ several competing official market makers in a security. These market makers are required to maintain two-sided markets during exchange hours and are obligated to buy and sell at their displayed bids and offers. They typically do not receive the trading advantages a specialist does, but they do get some, such as the ability to naked short a stock, i.e., selling it without borrowing it. In most situations, only official market makers are permitted to engage in naked shorting. Changes to the rules in the 2000s and 2010s have explicitly banned naked shorting by options market makers.
In liquid markets like the New York Stock Exchange, nearly every asset has open interest, providing two benefits: price takers can buy or sell at any time, and observers can continually monitor a precise price of every asset.
A prediction market, or market explicitly designed to uncover the value of an asset, relies heavily on continual price discovery holding true. Prediction markets benefit from automated market makers, or algorithmic traders that maintain constant open interest, providing needed liquidity to the markets that would be difficult to provide naturally.
Examples of New York market makers are Optiver, Jane Street Capital, Flow Traders, IMC, and Virtu Financial, according to Article 17(13) of Regulation (EU) No 236/2012 of the European Parliament and of the Council
of 14 March 2012.
London[edit]
On the London Stock Exchange there are official market makers for many securities. Some of the LSE's member firms take on the obligation of always making a two-way price in each of the stocks in which they make markets. Their prices are the ones displayed on the Stock Exchange Automated Quotation (SEAQ) system and it is they who generally deal with brokers buying or selling stock on behalf of clients.
Proponents of the official market making system claim market makers add to the liquidity and depth of the market by taking a short or long position for a time, thus assuming some risk in return for the chance of a small profit. On the LSE, one can always buy and sell stock: each stock always has at least two market makers and they are obliged to deal.
In contrast, on smaller, order-driven markets such as the JSE Securities Exchange it can be difficult to determine the buying and selling prices of even a small block of stocks that lack a clear and immediate market value because there are often no buyers or sellers on the order board.
Unofficial market makers are free to operate on order driven markets or, indeed, on the LSE. They do not have the obligation to always be making a two-way price, but they do not have the advantage that everyone must deal with them either.
Examples of UK Market makers since Big Bang Day are Peel Hunt LLP, Winterflood Securities, Liberum Capital, Shore Capital, Fairfax IS and Altium Securities.
Prior to the Big Bang, jobbers had exclusive rights of market making on the LSE.
Frankfurt[edit]
The Frankfurt Stock Exchange (FWB) runs a system of market makers appointed by the listed companies. These are called "designated sponsors". Designated Sponsors secure higher liquidity by quoting binding prices for buying and selling the shares. The largest market maker by number of mandates in Germany is ODDO BHF Corporates & Markets AG.[citation needed]
Tokyo[edit]
Since 2018, the Tokyo Stock Exchange has had an ETF Market Making Incentive Scheme in place, which provides incentives to designated market makers who maintain quoting obligations in qualified ETFs. This list of market makers includes Nomura Securities, Flow Traders, and Optiver.
Decentralized network protocols[edit]
This section may be very hard to understand. Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page. Please help clarify it. (March 2022)
Liquidity provision in a decentralized network protocol works rather differently. There are no companies nor other centralized entities involved at the protocol level. Companies or individuals may, however, choose to use the protocol, by providing liquidity to the protocol, typically in return for the prospect of making an ROI on the assets committed to the liquidity pools. Traditional courts with jurisdiction in defined geographic boundaries may have difficulty regulating or shutting down such protocols, since the protocols have no central or headquarters jurisdiction in which they operate.[citation needed] The network operates on the principles, and according to the code, that is running on the network.
Income of market makers[edit]
The income of a market maker is the difference between the bid price, the price at which the firm is willing to buy a stock, and the ask price, the price at which the firm is willing to sell it. It is known as the market-maker spread, or bid–ask spread. Supposing that equal amounts of buy and sell orders arrive and the price never changes, this is the amount that the market maker will gain on each round trip.
Market makers usually also provide liquidity to the firm's clients, for which they earn a commission.
See also[edit]
Divide and choose, analogous to a two-way price
List of finance topics
Sales and trading
References[edit]
^ Radcliffe, Robert C. (1997). Investment: Concepts, Analysis, Strategy. Addison-Wesley Educational Publishers, Inc. p. 134. ISBN 0-673-99988-2.
^ a b "Market Makers". Retrieved 17 April 2015.
^ "Designated Primary Market Maker (DPM) Program Info". CBoe.org. Archived from the original on 2016-10-22. Retrieved 2014-06-25.
^ "List of U.S. market makers". Archived from the original on 2009-01-22. Retrieved 2008-10-31.
^ "List of market makers in Canada". Archived from the original on 2007-01-09. Retrieved 2008-10-31.
^ "'Naked' short-selling ban now permanent". NBCNews. Associated Press. July 27, 2009.
^ Barker, Alex (October 19, 2011). "EU ban on 'naked' CDS to become permanent". Financial Times. Archived from the original on 2022-12-10. Retrieved 27 September 2012.
^ a b c Othman, Abraham; Sandholm, Tuomas; Pennock, David; Reeves, Daniel. "A Practical Liquidity-Sensitive Automated Market Maker" (PDF). harvard.edu. Harvard University. Retrieved 14 July 2014.
^ "List of market makers and authorised primary dealers". esma.europa.eu. European Securities and Markets Authority. Retrieved 28 September 2022.
^ "Winterflood Home - Winterflood Securities". Wins.co.uk.
^ "Deutsche Börse Xetra - Designated Sponsors". Archived from the original on 2013-06-09. Retrieved 2013-08-07.
^ "JPX ETF Market Making Incentive Scheme".
^ Croman, Kyle; Decker, Christian; Ittay, Eyal; Gencer, Adem Efe; Juels, Ari (31 August 2016). "On Scaling Decentralized Blockchains: (A Position Paper)". Financial Cryptography and Data Security. Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Vol. 9604. Ahmed Kosba, Andrew Miller, Prateek Saxena, Elaine Shi, Emin Gün Sirer, Dawn Song, Roger Wattenhofer. SpringerLink. pp. 106–125. doi:10.1007/978-3-662-53357-4_8. ISBN 978-3-662-53356-7. Retrieved 9 March 2021.
^ Aldridge, Irene (April 2013). High-Frequency Trading: A Practical Guide to Algorithmic Strategies and Trading Systems. John Wiley & Sons. ISBN 9781118416822.
External links[edit]
Understanding Derivatives: Markets and Infrastructure - Chapter 1 Derivatives Overview Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, Financial Markets Group
vteFinancial marketsTypes of markets
Primary market
Secondary market
Third market
Fourth market
Types of stocks
Common stock
Golden share
Preferred stock
Restricted stock
Tracking stock
Share capital
Authorised capital
Issued shares
Shares outstanding
Treasury stock
Participants
Broker
Floor broker
Inter-dealer broker
Broker-dealer
Market maker
Trader
Floor trader
Proprietary trader
Quantitative analyst
Investor
Hedger
Speculator
Arbitrager
Scalper
Regulator
Trading venues
Exchange
List of stock exchanges
Trading hours
Over-the-counter (off-exchange)
Alternative Trading System (ATS)
Multilateral trading facility (MTF)
Electronic communication network (ECN)
Direct market access (DMA)
Straight-through processing (STP)
Dark pool (private exchange)
Crossing network
Liquidity aggregator
Stock valuation
Alpha
Arbitrage pricing theory (APT)
Beta
Buffett indicator (Cap-to-GDP)
Book value (BV)
Capital asset pricing model (CAPM)
Capital market line (CML)
Dividend discount model (DDM)
Dividend yield
Earnings yield
EV/EBITDA
Fed model
Net asset value (NAV)
Security characteristic line
Security market line (SML)
T-model
Trading theories and strategies
Algorithmic trading
Buy and hold
Contrarian investing
Dollar cost averaging
Efficient-market hypothesis (EMH)
Fundamental analysis
Growth stock
Market timing
Modern portfolio theory (MPT)
Momentum investing
Mosaic theory
Pairs trade
Post-modern portfolio theory (PMPT)
Random walk hypothesis (RMH)
Sector rotation
Style investing
Swing trading
Technical analysis
Trend following
Value averaging
Value investing
Related terms
Bid–ask spread
Block trade
Cross listing
Dividend
Dual-listed company
DuPont analysis
Efficient frontier
Financial law
Flight-to-quality
Government bond
Greenspan put
Haircut
Initial public offering (IPO)
Long
Mandatory offer
Margin
Market anomaly
Market capitalization
Market depth
Market manipulation
Market trend
Mean reversion
Momentum
Open outcry
Order book
Position
Public float
Public offering
Rally
Returns-based style analysis
Reverse stock split
Share repurchase
Short selling
Slippage
Speculation
Squeeze-out
Stock dilution
Stock exchange
Stock market index
Stock split
Stock swap
Trade
Tender offer
Uptick rule
Volatility
Voting interest
Yield
Authority control databases: National
Germany
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Market_maker&oldid=1216144179"
Category: Financial marketsHidden categories: Articles with short descriptionShort description is different from WikidataAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from April 2021Articles containing potentially dated statements from October 2008All articles containing potentially dated statementsArticles with unsourced statements from May 2021Wikipedia articles that are incomprehensible from March 2022All Wikipedia articles that are incomprehensibleArticles with GND identifiers
This page was last edited on 29 March 2024, at 10:07 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 4.0;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Code of Conduct
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement
Mobile view
Toggle limited content width