Over-the-counter (finance) - Wikipedia
Jump to content
Main menu
Main menu
move to sidebar
hide
Navigation
Main pageContentsCurrent eventsRandom articleAbout WikipediaContact usDonate
Contribute
HelpLearn to editCommunity portalRecent changesUpload file
Search
Search
Create account
Log in
Personal tools
Create account Log in
Pages for logged out editors learn more
ContributionsTalk
Contents
move to sidebar
hide
(Top)
1Stocks
2Contracts
3Counterparty risk
4Importance of OTC derivatives in modern banking
5See also
6Notes
7Citations
8References
9External links
Toggle the table of contents
Over-the-counter (finance)
28 languages
العربيةCatalàČeštinaDeutschEspañolفارسیFrançais한국어Հայերենहिन्दीItalianoעבריתLatviešuLietuviųNederlandsनेपाली日本語Norsk bokmålPolskiPortuguêsРусскийSuomiSvenskaTürkçeУкраїнськаTiếng Việt粵語中文
Edit links
ArticleTalk
English
ReadEditView history
Tools
Tools
move to sidebar
hide
Actions
ReadEditView history
General
What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationCite this pageGet shortened URLDownload QR codeWikidata item
Print/export
Download as PDFPrintable version
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Trading done directly between two parties
The examples and perspective in this article deal primarily with the United States and do not represent a worldwide view of the subject. You may improve this article, discuss the issue on the talk page, or create a new article, as appropriate. (January 2014) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
For type of medicine, see Over-the-counter drug.
Part of a series onFinancial markets
Public market
Exchange · Securities
Bond market
Bond valuation
Corporate bond
Fixed income
Government bond
High-yield debt
Municipal bond
Securitization
Stock market
Common stock
Preferred stock
Registered share
Stock
Stock certificate
Stock exchange
Other markets
Derivatives (Credit derivativeFutures exchangeHybrid security)
Foreign exchange (CurrencyExchange rate)
Commodity
Money
Real estate
Reinsurance
Over-the-counter (off-exchange)
ForwardsOptions
Spot marketSwaps
Trading
Participants
Regulation
Clearing
Related areas
Banks and banking
Finance
corporate
personal
public
vte
Over-the-counter (OTC) or off-exchange trading or pink sheet trading is done directly between two parties, without the supervision of an exchange. It is contrasted with exchange trading, which occurs via exchanges. A stock exchange has the benefit of facilitating liquidity, providing transparency, and maintaining the current market price. In an OTC trade, the price is not necessarily publicly disclosed.
OTC trading, as well as exchange trading, occurs with commodities, financial instruments (including stocks), and derivatives of such products. Products traded on traditional stock exchanges, and other regulated bourse platforms, must be well standardized. This means that exchanged deliverables match a narrow range of quantity, quality, and identity which is defined by the exchange and identical to all transactions of that product. This is necessary for there to be transparency in stock exchange-based equities trading.
The OTC market does not have this limitation. Parties may agree on an unusual quantity, for example. In OTC, market contracts are bilateral (i.e. the contract is only between two parties), and each party could have credit risk concerns with respect to the other party. The OTC derivative market is significant in some asset classes: interest rate, foreign exchange, stocks, and commodities.
In 2008, approximately 16% of all U.S. stock trades were "off-exchange trading"; by April 2014, that number increased to about 40%. Although the notional amount outstanding of OTC derivatives in late 2012 had declined 3.3% over the previous year, the volume of cleared transactions at the end of 2012 totalled US$346.4 trillion. The Bank for International Settlements statistics on OTC derivatives markets showed that "notional amounts outstanding totalled $693 trillion at the end of June 2013... The gross market value of OTC derivatives – that is, the cost of replacing all outstanding contracts at current market prices – declined between end-2012 and end-June 2013, from $25 trillion to $20 trillion."
Stocks[edit]
Further information: Penny stock and Microcap stock
In the United States, over-the-counter trading in stock is carried out by market makers using inter-dealer quotation services such as OTC Link (a service offered by OTC Markets Group).
Although exchange-listed stocks can be traded OTC on the third market, it is rarely the case. Usually OTC stocks are not listed nor traded on exchanges, and vice versa. Stocks quoted on the OTCBB must comply with certain limited U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) reporting requirements.
The SEC imposes more stringent financial and reporting requirements on other OTC stocks, specifically the OTCQX stocks (traded through the OTC Market Group Inc). Other OTC stocks have no reporting requirements, for example Pink Sheets securities and "gray market" stocks. However, in 2021, the pink sheets market came under the spotlight of greater regulatory scrutiny.
Some companies, with Wal-Mart as one of the largest, began trading as OTC stocks and eventually upgraded to a listing on fully regulated market. By 1969 Wal-Mart Stores Inc. was incorporated. In 1972, with stores in five states, including Arkansas, Kansas, Louisiana, Oklahoma and Missouri, Wal-Mart began trading as over-the-counter (OTC) stocks. By 1972 Walmart had earned over US$1 billion in sales — the fastest company to ever accomplish this. In 1972 Wal-Mart was listed on the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE) under the ticker symbol WMT.
In Kiplinger in 2017, Dan Burrows wrote that American OTC markets are rife with penny stock fraud and other risks, and should generally be avoided by investors "with the exception of large, established foreign firms". Reputable companies located outside the U.S., he notes, sometimes sell stock over-the-counter to gain access to American markets while avoiding the expense of keeping two sets of audited paperwork to be listed on multiple stock exchanges (one in their homeland or to international standards, and one for American standards).
Contracts[edit]
An over-the-counter is a bilateral contract in which two parties (or their brokers or bankers as intermediaries) agree on how a particular trade or agreement is to be settled in the future. It is usually from an investment bank to its clients directly. Forwards and swaps are prime examples of such contracts. It is mostly done online or by telephone. For derivatives, these agreements are usually governed by an International Swaps and Derivatives Association agreement. This segment of the OTC market is occasionally referred to as the "Fourth Market". Critics have labelled the OTC market as the "dark market" because prices are often unpublished and unregulated.
Over-the-counter derivatives are especially important for hedging risk in that they can be used to create a "perfect hedge". With exchange traded contracts, standardization does not allow for as much flexibility to hedge risk because the contract is a one-size-fits-all instrument. With OTC derivatives, though, a firm can tailor the contract specifications to best suit its risk exposure.
Counterparty risk[edit]
OTC derivatives can lead to significant risks. Especially counterparty risk has gained particular emphasis due to the credit crisis in 2007. Counterparty risk is the risk that a counterparty in a derivatives transaction will default prior to expiration of the trade and will not make the current and future payments required by the contract. There are many ways to limit counterparty risk. One of them focuses on controlling credit exposure with diversification, netting, collateralisation and hedging. Central counterparty clearing of OTC trades has become more common in recent years, with regulators placing pressure on the OTC markets to clear and display trades openly.
In their market review published in 2010, the International Swaps and Derivatives Association[Notes 1] examined OTC Derivative Bilateral Collateralization Practice as one way of mitigating risk.
Importance of OTC derivatives in modern banking[edit]
OTC derivatives are a significant part of the world of global finance. The OTC derivatives markets grew exponentially from 1980 through 2000. This expansion has been driven by interest rate products, foreign exchange instruments and credit default swaps. The notional outstanding of OTC derivatives markets rose throughout the period and totalled approximately US$601 trillion at December 31, 2010.
In their 2000 paper by Schinasi et al. published by the International Monetary Fund in 2001, the authors observed that the increase in OTC derivatives transactions would have been impossible "without the dramatic advances in information and computer technologies" that occurred from 1980 to 2000. During that time, major internationally active financial institutions significantly increased the share of their earnings from derivatives activities. These institutions manage portfolios of derivatives involving tens of thousands of positions and aggregate global turnover over $1 trillion. At that time prior to the financial crisis of 2008, the OTC market was an informal network of bilateral counter-party relationships and dynamic, time-varying credit exposures whose size and distribution tied to important asset markets. International financial institutions increasingly nurtured the ability to profit from OTC derivatives activities and financial markets participants benefitted from them. In 2000 the authors acknowledged that the growth in OTC transactions "in many ways made possible, the modernization of commercial and investment banking and the globalization of finance". However, in September, an IMF team led by Mathieson and Schinasi cautioned that "episodes of turbulence" in the late 1990s "revealed the risks posed to market stability originated in features of OTC derivatives instruments and markets.
See also[edit]
Collateral management
Dark liquidity
Delta one
London Platinum and Palladium Market
Special settlement (securities)
Notes[edit]
^ ISDA 2012 Market Analysis drew on "information sources including LCH.Clearnet's SwapClear, TriOptima, the DTCC Trade Information Warehouse, Markit, ICE, CME, ISDA's 2012 Margin Survey and other clearinghouses and trade vendors."
Citations[edit]
^ Murphy, Chris B. (April 21, 2021). "A Review of Pink Sheet Stocks and How Investors Can Trade Them". Investopedia. Retrieved 2022-04-02.
^ a b c McCrank 2014.
^ Gregory 2011, p. 7.
^ ISDA 2013.
^ Bank for International Settlements (BIS) 2013.
^  Price, Michelle; Mccrank, John (2021-09-23). "U.S. 'pink sheets' in shakeup as securities regulator looks to stamp out fraud". Reuters. Retrieved 2023-05-09.
^ a b Better Trades 2012.
^ Dan Burroughs (2017-11-15). Penny Stocks: Why You Should Always Stay Away. Kiplinger.com, accessed 18 July 2020
^ chicagofed.org
^ Gregory 2011, p. 17.
^ Gregory 2011, p. 25.
^ OTC Clearing 'FIX'ed Up. FIXGlobal.
^ A Focus on OTC Clearing Innovation Archived 2011-09-29 at the Wayback Machine. Intercontinental Exchange.
^ a b International Swaps and Derivatives Association (ISDA) 2010.
^ a b Schinasi et al. 2001, pp. 5–7.
^ Mathieson & Schinasi 2000, p. 3.
References[edit]
Monetary and Economic Department (November 2013), "Statistical release: OTC derivatives statistics at end June 2013" (PDF), Bank for International Settlements (BIS), retrieved 12 April 2014
"WMT Overview", Better Trades, 2012, archived from the original on 13 April 2014, retrieved 12 April 2014
"Market Review of OTC Derivative Bilateral Collateralization Practices" (PDF), International Swaps and Derivatives Association (ISDA), 1 March 2010, archived from the original (PDF) on 12 May 2013, retrieved 12 April 2014
"OTC Derivatives Market Analysis, Year-End 2010", ISDA, 26 May 2011
"OTC Derivatives Market Analysis, Year-End 2012", ISDA, June 2013
Gregory, Jon (7 September 2011), Counterparty Credit Risk: The new challenge for global financial markets, John Wiley & Sons, p. 448, ISBN 978-0-470-68576-1
Mathieson, Donald J.; Schinasi, Garry J. (September 2000), International Capital Markets: Developments, Prospects, and Key Policy Issues (PDF), World Economic and Financial Surveys
McCrank, John (6 April 2014), Dark markets may be more harmful than high-frequency trading, New York: Reuters, retrieved 12 April 2014
Schinasi, Garry J.; Craig, R. Sean; Drees, Burkhard; Kramer, Charles (9 January 2001), Modern Banking and OTC Derivatives Markets: The Transformation of Global Finance and its Implications for Systemic Risk, International Monetary Fund, ISBN 1-55775-999-5, retrieved 12 April 2014
External links[edit]
European Union proposals on derivatives regulation - 2008 onwards
Understanding Derivatives: Markets and Infrastructure – Chapter 3, Over-the-Counter Derivatives By Richard Heckinger, Ivana Ruffini, and Kirstin Wells (Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago)
vteFinancial marketsTypes of markets
Primary market
Secondary market
Third market
Fourth market
Types of stocks
Common stock
Golden share
Preferred stock
Restricted stock
Tracking stock
Share capital
Authorised capital
Issued shares
Shares outstanding
Treasury stock
Participants
Broker
Floor broker
Inter-dealer broker
Broker-dealer
Market maker
Trader
Floor trader
Proprietary trader
Quantitative analyst
Investor
Hedger
Speculator
Arbitrager
Scalper
Regulator
Trading venues
Exchange
List of stock exchanges
Trading hours
Over-the-counter (off-exchange)
Alternative Trading System (ATS)
Multilateral trading facility (MTF)
Electronic communication network (ECN)
Direct market access (DMA)
Straight-through processing (STP)
Dark pool (private exchange)
Crossing network
Liquidity aggregator
Stock valuation
Alpha
Arbitrage pricing theory (APT)
Beta
Buffett indicator (Cap-to-GDP)
Book value (BV)
Capital asset pricing model (CAPM)
Capital market line (CML)
Dividend discount model (DDM)
Dividend yield
Earnings yield
EV/EBITDA
Fed model
Net asset value (NAV)
Security characteristic line
Security market line (SML)
T-model
Trading theories and strategies
Algorithmic trading
Buy and hold
Contrarian investing
Dollar cost averaging
Efficient-market hypothesis (EMH)
Fundamental analysis
Growth stock
Market timing
Modern portfolio theory (MPT)
Momentum investing
Mosaic theory
Pairs trade
Post-modern portfolio theory (PMPT)
Random walk hypothesis (RMH)
Sector rotation
Style investing
Swing trading
Technical analysis
Trend following
Value averaging
Value investing
Related terms
Bid–ask spread
Block trade
Cross listing
Dividend
Dual-listed company
DuPont analysis
Efficient frontier
Financial law
Flight-to-quality
Government bond
Greenspan put
Haircut
Initial public offering (IPO)
Long
Mandatory offer
Margin
Market anomaly
Market capitalization
Market depth
Market manipulation
Market trend
Mean reversion
Momentum
Open outcry
Order book
Position
Public float
Public offering
Rally
Returns-based style analysis
Reverse stock split
Share repurchase
Short selling
Slippage
Speculation
Squeeze-out
Stock dilution
Stock exchange
Stock market index
Stock split
Stock swap
Trade
Tender offer
Uptick rule
Volatility
Voting interest
Yield
vteDerivatives marketDerivative (finance)OptionsTerms
Delta neutral
Exercise
Expiration
Moneyness
Open interest
Pin risk
Risk-free interest rate
Strike price
Synthetic position
the Greeks
Volatility
Vanillas
American
Bond option
Call
Employee stock option
European
Fixed income
FX
Option styles
Put
Warrants
Exotics
Asian
Barrier
Basket
Binary
Callable bull/bear contract
Chooser
Cliquet
Commodore
Compound
Forward start
Interest rate
Lookback
Mountain range
Rainbow
Spread
Swaption
Strategies
Backspread
Box spread
Butterfly
Calendar spread
Collar
Condor
Covered option
Credit spread
Debit spread
Diagonal spread
Fence
Intermarket spread
Iron butterfly
Iron condor
Jelly roll
Ladder
Naked option
Straddle
Strangle
Protective option
Ratio spread
Risk reversal
Vertical spread (Bear, Bull)
Valuation
Bachelier
Binomial
Black
Black–Scholes (equation)
Finite difference
Garman–Kohlhagen
Heston
Lattices
Margrabe
Put–call parity
MC Simulation
Real options
Trinomial
Vanna–Volga
Swaps
Amortising
Asset
Basis
Commodity
Conditional variance
Constant maturity
Correlation
Credit default
Currency
Dividend
Equity
Forex
Forward Rate Agreement
Inflation
Interest rate
Overnight indexed
Total return
Variance
Volatility
Year-on-Year Inflation-Indexed
Zero Coupon
Zero Coupon Inflation-Indexed
ForwardsFutures
Contango
Commodities future
Currency future
Dividend future
Forward market
Forward price
Forwards pricing
Forward rate
Futures pricing
Interest rate future
Margin
Normal backwardation
Perpetual futures
Single-stock futures
Slippage
Stock market index future
Exotic derivatives
Commodity derivative
Energy derivative
Freight derivative
Inflation derivative
Property derivative
Weather derivative
Other derivatives
Collateralized debt obligation (CDO)
Constant proportion portfolio insurance
Contract for difference
Credit-linked note (CLN)
Credit default option
Credit derivative
Equity-linked note (ELN)
Equity derivative
Foreign exchange derivative
Fund derivative
Fund of funds
Interest rate derivative
Mortgage-backed security
Power reverse dual-currency note (PRDC)
Market issues
Consumer debt
Corporate debt
Government debt
Great Recession
Municipal debt
Tax policy
Business portal
vteFinancial risk and financial risk managementCategoriesCredit risk
Consumer credit risk
Sovereign credit risk
Settlement risk
Default risk
Concentration risk
Credit derivative
Securitization
Market risk
Commodity risk (e.g. Volume risk, Basis risk, Shape risk, Holding period risk, Price area risk)
Equity risk
Valuation risk
FX risk
Margining risk
Interest rate risk
Inflation risk
Volatility risk
Liquidity risk (e.g. Refinancing risk, Deposit risk)
Operational risk
Operational risk management
Business risk
Model risk
Reputational risk
Country risk
Political risk
Legal risk
Other
Execution risk
Profit risk
Systemic risk
Non-financial risk
Modeling
Arbitrage pricing theory
Black–Scholes model
Replicating portfolio
Cash flow matching
Conditional Value-at-Risk (CVaR)
Copula
Drawdown
First-hitting-time model
Interest rate immunization
Market portfolio
Modern portfolio theory
Omega ratio
RAROC
Risk-free rate
Risk parity
Sharpe ratio
Sortino ratio
Survival analysis (Proportional hazards model)
Tracking error
Value-at-Risk (VaR) and extensions (Profit at risk, Margin at risk, Liquidity at risk, Cash flow at risk, Earnings at risk)
Basic concepts
Diversification
Expected return
Hazard
Hedge
Risk
Risk pool
Systematic risk
Financial law
Moral hazard
Financial economics
Investment management
Mathematical finance
Authority control databases International
FAST
National
France
BnF data
Germany
Israel
United States
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Over-the-counter_(finance)&oldid=1188182721"
Categories: Financial riskStock marketDerivatives (finance)Financial marketsElectronic trading systemsMathematical financeHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksArticles with short descriptionShort description is different from WikidataArticles with limited geographic scope from January 2014United States-centricArticles with FAST identifiersArticles with BNF identifiersArticles with BNFdata identifiersArticles with GND identifiersArticles with J9U identifiersArticles with LCCN identifiers
This page was last edited on 3 December 2023, at 21:03 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 4.0;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Code of Conduct
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement
Mobile view
Toggle limited content width