Yield (finance) - Wikipedia
Jump to content
Main menu
Main menu
move to sidebar
hide
Navigation
Main pageContentsCurrent eventsRandom articleAbout WikipediaContact usDonate
Contribute
HelpLearn to editCommunity portalRecent changesUpload file
Search
Search
Create account
Log in
Personal tools
Create account Log in
Pages for logged out editors learn more
ContributionsTalk
Contents
move to sidebar
hide
(Top)
1Fixed income securities
2Preferred shares
3Common shares
4REITs, royalty trusts, income trusts, annuities
5Real estate and property
6Factors affecting the yield
7Special cases
8See also
9References
Toggle the table of contents
Yield (finance)
9 languages
DanskDeutschفارسیFrançaisFryskBahasa IndonesiaNederlandsРусскийSimple English
Edit links
ArticleTalk
English
ReadEditView history
Tools
Tools
move to sidebar
hide
Actions
ReadEditView history
General
What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationCite this pageGet shortened URLDownload QR codeWikidata item
Print/export
Download as PDFPrintable version
In other projects
Wikimedia Commons
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Financial term
For other uses, see Yield.
Part of a series onFinance
Markets
Assets
Bond
Commodity
Derivatives
Foreign exchange
Money
Over-the-counter
Private equity
Real estate
Spot
Stock
Participants
Investor
institutional
Retail
Speculator
Locations
Financial centres
Offshore financial centres
Conduit and sink OFCs
Instruments
Bond
Cash
Collateralised debt obligation
Credit default swap
Time deposit (certificate of deposit)
Credit line
Deposit
Derivative
Futures contract
Indemnity
Insurance
Letter of credit
Loan
Mortgage
Option (callexoticput)
Performance bonds
Repurchase agreement
Stock
Security
Syndicated loan
Synthetic CDO
Corporate
General
Accounting
Audit
Capital budgeting
Credit rating agency
Risk management
Financial statements
Transactions
Leveraged buyout
Mergers and acquisitions
Structured finance
Venture capital
Taxation
Base erosion and profit shifting (BEPS)
Corporate tax haven
Tax inversion
Tax haven
Transfer pricing
Personal
Credit / Debt
Employment contract
Financial planning
RetirementStudent loan
Public
Government spending
Final consumption expenditure
OperationsRedistribution
Transfer payment
Government revenue
TaxationDeficit spending
Budget (balance)Debt
Non-tax revenue
Warrant of payment
Banking
Central bank
Deposit account
Fractional-reserve
Full-reserve
Loan
Money supply
Lists of banks
Bank regulation
Banking license
Basel Accords
Bank for International Settlements
Financial Stability Board
Deposit insurance
Separation of investment and retail banking
Regulation · Financial law
International Financial Reporting Standards
ISO 31000
Professional certification
Fund governance
Economic history
Private equity and venture capital
Recession
Stock market bubble
Stock market crash
Accounting scandals
Business and Economics portal
Money portalvte
In finance, the yield on a security is a measure of the ex-ante return to a holder of the security. It is one component of return on an investment, the other component being the change in the market price of the security. It is a measure applied to fixed income securities, common stocks, preferred stocks, convertible stocks and bonds, annuities and real estate investments.
There are various types of yield, and the method of calculation depends on the particular type of yield and the type of security.
Fixed income securities[edit]
Main article: Bond valuation
The coupon rate (or nominal rate) on a fixed income security is the interest that the issuer agrees to pay to the security holder each year, expressed as a percentage of the security's principal amount (par value).
The current yield is the ratio of the annual interest (coupon) payment and the bond's market price.
The yield to maturity is an estimate of the total rate of return anticipated to be earned by an investor who buys a bond at a given market price, holds it to maturity, and receives all interest payments and the payment of par value on schedule. Unlike current yield, it takes into account the payment of principal to the bondholder when the bond matures.
For bonds with embedded call or put options:
yield to call uses the same methodology as the yield to maturity, but assumes that the issuer calls the bond at the first opportunity instead of allowing it to be held until maturity;
yield to put assumes that the bondholder  sells the bond back to the issuer at the first opportunity; and
yield to worst is the lowest of the yield to all possible call dates, yield to all possible put dates and yield to maturity.
Par yield assumes that the security's market price is equal to par value (also known as face value or nominal value). It is the metric used in the U.S. Treasury's daily official "Treasury Par Yield Curve Rates".
Preferred shares[edit]
The dividend rate is the total amount of dividends paid in a year, divided by the principal value of the preferred share. The current yield is those same payments divided by the preferred share's market price. If the preferred share has a maturity or call provision (which is not always the case), yield to maturity and yield to call can be calculated.
Common shares[edit]
The current dividend yield is the annualized cash dividend (in dollars, RMB, Yen, etc.) divided by the current market price of one share. Most web sites and reports are updated with the expected future year's payments, not the past year's.
REITs, royalty trusts, income trusts, annuities[edit]
Distribution yields from REITs, royalty trusts, income trusts and annuities often include return of capital, cash that exceeds the income earned.[citation needed]
Real estate and property[edit]
Several different yields are used as measures of a real estate investment, including initial, equivalent and reversionary yields.
Initial yield is the annualised rents of a property expressed as a percentage of the property value.
E.g.
£100,000 passing rent per annum
£1,850,000 valuation
100000/1850000 = 0.054 or 5.4%
Reversionary yield is the anticipated yield to which the initial yield will rise (or fall) once the rent reaches the ERV.
E.g.
£150,000 ERV per annum
£1,850,000 valuation
150000/1850000 = 0.081 or 8.1%
Equivalent yield lies somewhere in between the initial yield and reversionary yield, it encapsulates the DCF of the property with rents rising (or falling) from the current annualised rent to the underlying estimated rental value (ERV) less costs that are incurred along the way. The discount rate used to calculate the net present value (NPV) of the DCF to equal zero is the equivalent yield, or the IRR.
The calculation not only takes into account all costs, but other assumptions including rent reviews and void periods. A trial and error method can be used to identify the equivalent yield of a DCF, or if using Excel, the goal seek function can be used.[citation needed]
Factors affecting the yield[edit]
All financial instruments compete with each other in the financial markets. Investor perceptions of risk influence the yield they require to justify investment in a particular security. Higher yields allow owners to recoup their investments sooner, and so lessen risk. All other things being equal, the weaker the credit rating of the issuer, the higher the yield must be. This reflects the tendency for investors to require compensation for the additional risk that the issuer may default on its obligations to pay interest and repay the principal at par value.
Yield levels vary with expectations of inflation and the general outlook for the economy (the business cycle). Fears of high inflation in the future mean that investors ask for a higher yield today to protect their purchasing power.
The yield on a fixed income security is inversely related to financial market interest rates. If market rates rise, for example due to inflation or a change in the economy, the price of a bond or note falls, driving its yield higher to maintain parity with market rates. Conversely, if market rates decline, then the price of the bond should increase, driving its yield lower, all else being equal.
Under normal market conditions, long-term fixed income securities (for example, a 10-year bond) have higher yields than short-term securities (e.g., a 2-year bond). This reflects the fact that long-term securities are more exposed to the uncertainties of what could happen in the future—especially changes in market rates of interest. Therefore, longer maturity securities have more potential price volatility. The relationship between yield and maturity is described by the yield curve.
Special cases[edit]
Coupon payments from floating rate bonds and notes and Treasury Inflation Protected Securities are reset periodically based on a specified benchmark. It is not possible to accurately calculate the future stream of coupon payments from these securities, so yield to maturity and internal rates of return cannot be calculated. Other metrics must be used.
See also[edit]
Ecological yield
Yield curve
30-day yield
7-day SEC yield
Nominal yield
Bond (finance)
Roll yield
References[edit]
^ Fabozzi, Frank J. (1996). Bond Markets, Analysis and Strategies. Upper Saddle River, New Jersey.: Prentice-Hall, Inc. p. 3. ISBN 0-13-339151-5.
^ Thau, Annette (2001). The Bond Book (Revised ed.). New York: McGraw-Hill. p. 3. ISBN 0-07-135862-5.
^ Melicher and Welshans (1988). Finance: Introduction to Markets, Institutions and Management (7 ed.). Cincinnati, Ohiio: South-Western Publishing Company. p. 481. ISBN 0-538-06160-X.
^ Martinelli, Lionel, Priaulet, Phillippe and Priaulet, Stephane (2003). Fixed Income Securities: Valuation, Risk Management and Portfolio Strategies. Chichester, England: John Wiley & Sons. p. 49. ISBN 0-470-85277-1.{{cite book}}:  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link)
^ Thau, Annette (2001). The Bond Book (Revised ed.). New York: McGraw-Hill. pp. 102–104. ISBN 0-07-135862-5.
^ Thau op cit p. 56.
^ Fabozzi op cit p. 40-41.
^ Martinelli, Lionel; Priaulet, Philippe; Priaulet, Stephane (2003). Fixed-Income Securities: Valuation, Risk Management, and Portfolio Strategies. Chichester, England: John Wiley & Sons Ltd. p. 54. ISBN 0-470-85277-1.{{cite book}}:  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link)
^ Girola, James. "The Yield Curve for Nominal Treasury Issues" (PDF). U.S. Department of the Treasury. Retrieved 14 January 2022.
^ Melicher and Welshans op cit p. 244.
^ Nikbakht, Ehsan and Groppelli, A.A. Finance (sixth ed.). Haupaggue, New York: Barron's Educational Series, Inc. p. 267. ISBN 978-0-7641-4759-3.{{cite book}}:  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link)
^ Initialyield.com (May 2012). "Glossary, Initial Yield". Initial Yield. Retrieved 2012-05-01.
^ Initialyield.com (May 2012). "Glossary, Reversionary Yield". Reversionary Yield. Retrieved 2012-05-01.
^ Initialyield.com (May 2012). "Glossary, Equivalent Yield". Equivalent Yield. Retrieved 2012-05-01.
^ Thau op cit p. 40.
^ Melicher and Welshans op cit p. 481.
^ Thau op cit p. 31.
^ Thau op cit p. 102-104, 205.
^ Fabozzi, Frank J. (1997). The Handbook of Fixed Income Securities. New York: McGraw-Hill. pp. 67, 260–262. ISBN 0-7863-1095-2.
^ "TIPS". The Wall Street Journal - Markets. Retrieved 24 April 2022.
vteFinancial marketsTypes of markets
Primary market
Secondary market
Third market
Fourth market
Types of stocks
Common stock
Golden share
Preferred stock
Restricted stock
Tracking stock
Share capital
Authorised capital
Issued shares
Shares outstanding
Treasury stock
Participants
Broker
Floor broker
Inter-dealer broker
Broker-dealer
Market maker
Trader
Floor trader
Proprietary trader
Quantitative analyst
Investor
Hedger
Speculator
Arbitrager
Scalper
Regulator
Trading venues
Exchange
List of stock exchanges
Trading hours
Over-the-counter (off-exchange)
Alternative Trading System (ATS)
Multilateral trading facility (MTF)
Electronic communication network (ECN)
Direct market access (DMA)
Straight-through processing (STP)
Dark pool (private exchange)
Crossing network
Liquidity aggregator
Stock valuation
Alpha
Arbitrage pricing theory (APT)
Beta
Buffett indicator (Cap-to-GDP)
Book value (BV)
Capital asset pricing model (CAPM)
Capital market line (CML)
Dividend discount model (DDM)
Dividend yield
Earnings yield
EV/EBITDA
Fed model
Net asset value (NAV)
Security characteristic line
Security market line (SML)
T-model
Trading theories and strategies
Algorithmic trading
Buy and hold
Contrarian investing
Dollar cost averaging
Efficient-market hypothesis (EMH)
Fundamental analysis
Growth stock
Market timing
Modern portfolio theory (MPT)
Momentum investing
Mosaic theory
Pairs trade
Post-modern portfolio theory (PMPT)
Random walk hypothesis (RMH)
Sector rotation
Style investing
Swing trading
Technical analysis
Trend following
Value averaging
Value investing
Related terms
Bid–ask spread
Block trade
Cross listing
Dividend
Dual-listed company
DuPont analysis
Efficient frontier
Financial law
Flight-to-quality
Government bond
Greenspan put
Haircut
Initial public offering (IPO)
Long
Mandatory offer
Margin
Market anomaly
Market capitalization
Market depth
Market manipulation
Market trend
Mean reversion
Momentum
Open outcry
Order book
Position
Public float
Public offering
Rally
Returns-based style analysis
Reverse stock split
Share repurchase
Short selling
Slippage
Speculation
Squeeze-out
Stock dilution
Stock exchange
Stock market index
Stock split
Stock swap
Trade
Tender offer
Uptick rule
Volatility
Voting interest
Yield
Authority control databases: National
Germany
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Yield_(finance)&oldid=1168520968"
Categories: Valuation (finance)Yield (finance)Financial economicsHidden categories: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors listArticles with short descriptionShort description matches WikidataAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from April 2022Articles with GND identifiers
This page was last edited on 3 August 2023, at 07:28 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 4.0;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Code of Conduct
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement
Mobile view
Toggle limited content width